Editorial
Editor's Desk: Eight is a Good Number
Despite the October-inspired darker tone of this issue, things have been going very well here at Clarkesworld. This issue marks our eighth anniversary and I have all sorts of good news to share. It’s hard to decide where to start, so I’m just going to do this in chronological order.
In early September, we won the British Fantasy Award for Best Magazine/Periodical at a ceremony held during FantasyCon in York, UK. Sadly, we weren’t able to be there in person, but I did send along a video just in case. We’d like to thank the members of BSFA for their nominations and the judges for the honor they’ve bestowed on us. This is our first British Fantasy Award win and we’re completely blown away by this news.
If you like cyborgs, you should check out my recent anthology Upgraded. It was published in trade paperback and ebook editions in September and has been receiving some very nice reviews. Initial orders were strong enough that the book almost immediately went into a second printing, which should hit the shelves mid-month. Looking for a first edition? Barnes & Noble ordered the most copies so they should still have some or you can buy direct from Wyrm Publishing. The ebook editions are available in all the usual places. By the way, E. Catherine Tobler’s story in this issue is a companion piece to her story in Upgraded.
In last month’s editorial, I announced our plans to regularly publish translated stories from China. Our Kickstarter campaign, which is still ongoing as I write this, has successfully funded the first year of this project, and we are hoping to include the first of many stories in our 100th issue this January. This means that our 2015 issues will be bigger than ever and feature four or five original works in each issue.
The response to our Kickstarter campaign was so enthusiastic that it funded in its first week. I’m very pleased that so many people are interested in reading more international science fiction represented in our pages, and to that end, we announced a Kickstarter stretch goal that will build a translation fund that will allow us to occasionally feature stories translated from even more languages. Again, this would be a supplemental story and not replace any of our regular fiction slots. We won’t know if this extra project will happen until after October 8, so I’ll give you another update next month.
Finally, we would like to congratulate Xia Jia. Last month, we published “Spring Festival: Happiness, Anger, Love, Sorrow, Joy” translated by Ken Liu. Ken has informed us that the original version of the story is one of five nominees for the Chinese Nebula Award. This is one of two highest honors that can be given in China, the other being the Galaxy Award. We’re very proud to have published the English language edition and wish her the best of luck!
Neil Clarke is the editor of Clarkesworld Magazine and Forever Magazine; owner of Wyrm Publishing; and a ten-time Hugo Award Nominee for Best Editor (short form). His anthologies include Upgraded, Galactic Empires, More Human Than Human, Touchable Unreality, The Final Frontier, Not One of Us, The Eagle has Landed, and the Best Science Fiction of the Years series. His latest anthology, The Best Science Fiction of the Year: Volume 6, is now available from Night Shade Books. He currently lives in NJ with his wife and two sons.