1120 words, short story
Comments on Your Provisional Patent Application for an Eternal Spirit Core
From: Emeka Nwobi
Sent: Thursday, November 24, 2034 4:29 PM
To: Chukwudi Nwobi < >
Subject: Emeka Nwobi has shared the file “Provisional Patent Application For An Eternal Spirit Core Final Draft” with you.
Sender’s Note: Please Review
The link below only works for direct recipients of this message.
[]
PATENT MEMORANDUM COVER SHEET
INVENTOR(S) INFORMATION
First Inventor’s Name:
Engr. Emeka Nwobi, MNSE
Second Inventor’s Name:
Prof. Chukwudi Nwobi
Commented [CNwobi]: Why am I credited as coinventor here? I don’t know what this is exactly.
Home Address:
51 Akewi Road, Onitsha, Nigeria.
Home Address:
9324 Olivia Broek Lane, Katy, TX 91404, USA
Citizenship:
Nigerian
Citizenship:
Nigerian
INVENTION INFORMATION
Title of Invention:
Methodology and System for Generating, Installing, and Running A Persistent Memrionic Emulator of Recorded Neural Patterns, Also Known As An “Eternal Spirit” Core (ESC) In A Human Personal Nanomachine Network Environment Node.
Commented [CNwobi]: “Eternal spirit”? Is this a joke?
Conception Date:
25 September 2032
Commented [CNwobi]: You were really thinking about this during the funeral?
First Disclosure to Whom/Where/When:
My brother, Prof. Chukwudi Nwobi and his wife, Dr. Mrs. Anwuli Nwobi, at their residence in Port Harcourt on 14 November 2033.
Commented [CNwobi]: I had no idea you were taking this seriously. I thought we were just speculating about the possibilities to prepare for the meeting with LegbaTech.
Is There a Sponsored Research or Engineering Project Related to This Disclosure?
No
Commented [CNwobi]: So you’ve been using the money they left us to develop this thing? How much has all this cost?
To Your Knowledge, Has This Invention Been Used for Any Commercial Purpose?
No
To Your Knowledge, Has Any Specific Technical Information Relating to This Invention Been Disclosed to a Third Party?
No
Do You Plan to Publish/Disclose Information Relating to This Invention within the Next Year?
Yes.
I will deliver a presentation on the fundamental theoretical framework I have developed, discuss the methodology with which this can be achieved, and illustrate the primary proposed application at the International Conference on Computing Frontiers (ICCF) in Denmark, between 14 and 17 December 2034.
Commented [CNwobi]: Please withdraw the paper until we have a chance to talk properly. I can’t believe the committee accepted an abstract based on this. They will laugh you out of the conference. Memrionic processing schemes cannot be downscaled to run on nanomachine units, the processes run at quantum level and still require large supercooled units just to emulate one human memrionic. Research into this is preliminary at best. Or did you find something new in the files I sent you last year before the Legbatech meeting? Emeka, is this seriously what you’ve been doing for the last year? Why you didn’t come to Anwuli’s 35th? Why you haven’t been answering my calls? I can see you’re online, editing the document right now so answer the phone please.
Prior Art
While independent memrionic copies have been generated and stored as part of established computing systems, no actual technologies and methods exist to embed such copies into a human personal nanomachine network environment with on-demand live responses.
Commented [CNwobi]: There is a reason for that. It’s impossible.
Related Products/References:
Commented [CNwobi]: OK fine. How did you get 3QPI memrionic network drivers to run on GLink? How is the nanomachine network not overheating? Does any of this even work? We really need to discuss this. I have tried to call you five times already. I will finish putting my comments on this document and call you again at your 10 a.m. sharp today before I go to bed. Just pick up the phone this time. Please. Anwuli has been worried sick about you since the funeral.
Summary of the Invention
A methodology and system for generating and installing a persistent memrionic emulator (the “eternal spirit” core) of any deceased individual whose neural patterns have been recorded (the “deceased”) in the personal nanomachine network environment node of a living client (the “user”) is described:
This invention will allow the generation of what may be described as an “eternal spirit” for those who are deceased or about to pass on. This “eternal spirit” has been designed to reside in the place it matters most—the minds of those who love them. It will also allow businesses to offer a unique and compelling solution to anyone who has lost loved ones and misses their counsel, their encouragement, and their love, by installing the live, context-optimized probabilistic memrionic models in their personal nanomachine networks. This will be particularly useful for those who wish to maintain a sense of constant contact with those who have passed on. Use cases include people who would want to know what their parents would think of significant life choices, how they would have reacted to the sight of their grandchildren playing, what words of encouragement and advice they would give in moments of crisis, etc.
Commented [CNwobi]: Ah. Emeka, Mama and Papa are gone. Even if you get this to work it won’t bring them back. It won’t be them. Not really. Memrionic scans aren’t people. Just echoes. Please stop this Emeka. They’re gone.
If Field/Human Testing Is Planned for This Invention, When Is It Currently Scheduled to Begin?
An alpha version of the prototype system will be tested using previously acquired memrionic scans of my mother, Mrs. Shiela Nwobi on 4 January 2035.
Commented [CNwobi]: Oh No. No. No. Emeka. Seriously, I know you’re reading this. Please, please, pick up my call.
Wole Talabi is a full-time engineer, part-time writer and some-time editor from Nigeria. His stories have appeared in F&SF, Lightspeed, Omenana, and several other places. He has edited three anthologies and co-written a play. His fiction has been nominated for several awards including the Caine Prize for African Writing and the Nommo Award which he won in 2018 and 2020. His debut collection of stories, Incomplete Solutions, is published by Luna Press. He likes scuba diving, elegant equations and oddly shaped things. He currently lives and works in Malaysia. Find him online at wtalabi.wordpress.com and @wtalabi on twitter.